# Unsoup *shchemas* for v.NuSome schemas in the v.Nu GitHub repository - in particular, schemas that combinemarkup languages - refer to file paths that do not exist in the repository.The paths exist only in the context of the distributed files(inside `vnu.jar`).These nonexistent paths prevent the schemas being usable directly from the v.Nu repo(for example, via GitHub Pages URLs).This repo offers a workaround in the form of "shim" schemas (*shchemas*,pronounced "shkeemas").This readme describes each of the Unsoup shim schemas, including usage andreason (justification) for existing.## `rdf.rnc`### UsageNot intended for direct use.### ReasonIncluded by the shim schema `xhtml5-svg-mathml.rnc`.## `xhtml5-all.rnc`Validates XHTML5 with "the lot": XHTML5 + SVG + MathML + RDFa.### Usagehttp://unsoup.github.io/validator/schema/xhtml5-all.rnc### ReasonValidator.nu offers the preset "XHTML5 + SVG 1.1 + MathML 3.0 + RDFa Lite 1.1". I wanted something similar.The Validator.nu preset refers to the URI:`http://s.validator.nu/xhtml5-rdfalite.rnc`that maps to the distributed file:`nu/validator/localentities/files/schema_xhtml5_rdfalite_rnc`that is a verbatim copy of the v.Nu repo source file:`schema/.drivers/xhtml5-rdfalite.rnc`that consists of the following lines:```include "xhtml5-svg-mathml.rnc"include "html5/xhtml5full-xhtml-rdfalite.rnc"```Unfortunately, that file is not usable directly from the repo, because:- Although `xhtml5-svg-mathml.rnc` exists in that same repo directory,it refers to paths that do not exist:  ```  include "svg11/svg11-inc.rnc"  include "svg11/inkscape.rnc"  include "mml3/mathml3-inc.rnc"  include "rdf/rdf.rnc"  ```   (The repo `.drivers` directory does not contain those subdirectories.)- The repo `.drivers` directory does not contain an `html5` subdirectory.The Unsoap shim schema `xhtml5-all.rnc` is not an exact equivalent of thev.Nu schema `xhtml5-rdfalite.rnc`.The shim includes the `xhtml5.rnc` file, and adds RDFa, not RDFa Lite.## `xhtml5-svg-mathml.rnc`### UsageNot intended for direct use.### ReasonIncluded by the shim schema `xhtml5-all.rnc`.